[WHOOSH]
>> With the dramatic
rise in sleep issues,
it has never been more necessary
to address this epidemic.
An influx of new research
has been shedding light
on the importance
of sleep and showing
the great promise of
natural approaches
to treating dysfunction.
This is "Gaia News."
[THEME MUSIC]
According to recent statistics,
at least one third of Americans
don't get the recommended
seven hours of sleep per night.
And over the last few
years, sleep problems
have been reported
in 40% of Americans.
Alarmed by these
numbers, researchers
have doubled their efforts at
studying the causes, effects,
and possible treatments.
Dr. Donese Worden is
a naturopathic doctor
who has worked with multiple
patients with sleep issues
and has lectured
extensively on the topic.
>> The importance of sleep
cannot be overstated.
It detoxes our body, not only
the brain in its detoxification
process but the entire body.
It allows us to
regenerate our body.
That's called ATP.
The cells also need to
rest at a certain point
to re-energize themselves
to do all of the processes
that they do in the body.
It allows us to tell our body
we need to burn more fat.
It allows our body to say, it
is time to regulate blood sugar,
help the cardiovascular
system repair.
If we're not
sleeping well, we're
more at risk for atherosclerosis
and other metabolic diseases.
>> One significant area of
recent research has been around
the causes of sleep problems.
Multiple factors have
been implicated, including
stress responses, nutritional
deficits and excesses,
and nighttime routines.
>> Your nighttime routine
is called sleep hygiene.
Is the room dark?
Blackout curtains
are important here.
Is the room cold enough?
That affects your sleep.
So looking at the basics
of cold room, dark room,
and blue light.
Is the computer on?
Are you looking at
your cell phone?
Blue light has been linked,
with a very recent study,
into affecting our quality
of our sleep and ability
to go to sleep.
>> Studies suggest that blue
light decreases the production
of melatonin, which is necessary
for the induction of sleep.
Another focus of recent
study is the connection
between nutrition,
inflammation, and sleep.
>> Long-term nutritional
deficiencies alter inflammation
in the body.
And when we have
inflammation or certain types
of inflammatory cells,
such as cytokines,
that affects our sleep cycles.
Those are new studies showing
us that the more inflammation
we have, the more sleep
disturbances we may have.
Asking your physician to run a
cardio reactive protein marker
would be a great way to look
at your overall inflammation.
>> Recent research has
also been clearly showing
the far-reaching consequences
of inadequate and poor-quality
sleep.
>> The more studies
that we conduct,
the more interplay we see
between sleep and many common
disorders in the body, from
obesity to cardiovascular
disease to diabetes.
Research has shown us that when
our sleep patterns are not good
that we are more likely
to have cognitive decline
during the day.
Our memory is not as good.
And our executive
function is not there.
And a large new
study just showed us
that if we are in the
50s and 60-year-olds,
if they're not
getting enough sleep,
they're more prone to have
dementia in their senior years.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the search for
solutions to sleep issues,
numerous recent studies
have borne out the efficacy
of various natural approaches.
>> In the "International
Journal of Clinical Practice,"
a recent study was looking for
non-pharmacological treatments
for insomnia.
And what they found was that
it's more prevalent in females.
And as females age, it
becomes more prevalent.
But the conclusion
showed that things
that really help the best were
cognitive behavioral therapy--
that's types of counseling--
exercise, relaxation,
and approaches like
light therapy--
the right kind of
light, not blue light--
but aromatherapy, music therapy,
and some herbal medicines
were shown to be helpful.
>> One interesting new study
provides another possible
solution for those
suffering from insomnia.
>> A new study from the "British
Journal of Sports Medicine"
showed that getting enough
physical activity during
the day may counter the negative
effects that happen from
unhealthy sleep patterns.
>> While the prevalence of
sleep issues is clearly a grave
concern, the increasingly deeper
understanding of their causes
and mounting evidence of the
success of natural treatments
should give hope to all those
desperately in need of a good
night's sleep.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.